and thank you to all of you for having
me here to uh exchange some uh some
thoughts with you um uh if you're
interested in following uh the details
of any of this work for the papers the
software the data sets everything is
here and then here are some uh
personal takes on what I think it all
means Let's uh think about our bodies
and one some of the magic that actually
happens every day if I told you that uh
with the power of my mind alone I could
depolarize electrically depolarize uh
something like 30% of the cells in the
body you might think that I'm talking
about some sort of yoga practice or some
uh very uh unusual Mind Body medicine
but actually this is exactly what
happens every day during voluntary
motion when you wake up in the morning
you may have very high level executive
goals um social goals career goals
whatever and in order for you to execute
behavior that implements those goals
this intent must move ions across Ross
the cell membrane in your muscle cells
so this this ability of uh of of
highlevel intelligence and its goals to
control the chemistry of the body is not
some rare and and and unusual phenomenon
it is the everyday miracle that is
implemented by the electrical system of
the body and uh there's a there's a
scientist called Fabrizio Benedetti who
has this this beautiful uh phrase
through his work on the placebo effect
and then we'll come back to this at the
end he says words and drugs have the
same mechanism of action and this is
because the intelligence of the mind and
the uh mechanisms that drive the
physiology and the morphology of the
body are really part of the same system
and this is very important I think for
the future of medicine and this is what
I will talk about today so the first
thing to realize is that all of us are
in an important sense Collective
intelligences not just ants and termites
and bird flocks and things like that but
all of us because we are all made of a
very interesting AG gental material this
is a single cell this is called the lacr
areia it's a free living organism but
it's a single cell it has no brain it
has no nervous system and yet it has
these amazingly competent behaviors to
solve all of its local single cell level
problems and if you look inside of the
cell is also all of this stuff right so
all of us are really collective
intelligence is made of many components
and these components are not only
complex but they also have agendas they
also have as I will point out a kind of
intelligence and this becomes very
important for the future of
medicine within this cell that I just
showed you are some molecular networks
and you might think that in order to
have uh memory to have learning to have
intelligent problem solving you would
need many of these cells maybe even you
think they need neurons or a brain or
something like that but what we have
found is that and and other people have
found this as well is that even within
single cells the molecular networks so
Gene regulator networks protein Pathways
things like this already exhibit many
different kinds of learning including
pavlovian conditioning and you can find
that in these the details in these
papers but uh in these molecular
networks if you stimulate various nodes
by providing agonists to turn on uh
specific specific uh elements in this
pathway and you trace what happens to
certain output nodes you will find that
you can uh you can see dynamics of
habituation sensitization associative
conditioning and probably much more
we're looking for many other things now
so uh the ability to learn and to solve
problems is uh baked into the very
bottom of the the substrate of which we
are all made in fact the whole body
functions as something we call a
multiscale competency architecture where
all the way from the bottom so the
molecular networks the subcellular
organel the the the cells the tissues
the organs and all the way through
groups and colonies uh you see that each
level of organization solves problems it
is not just a structurally nested set of
set of dolls one within the other but
actually uh it is a set of diverse
intelligences which solve problems in
different kind of spaces and I will talk
about uh how that how that works so
let's think about the endgame of
medicine um what what what are we really
looking for uh I think that uh in the
future someday you will be able to sit
in front of a computer and you will be
able to draw uh the anatomy of the plant
animal organ or biobot that you want
whatever it is you can draw anything you
like any anotomical structure whatsoever
and if if we have this anatomical
compiler what it will do is convert that
description into a set of stimuli that
have to be given to cells to get them to
build exactly this in this case this
nice three-headed flatworm now why we
need something like this is clear if we
had the ability to convey uh our goals
to groups of cells then all of this
would be solved there would be no more
birth defects traumatic injury cancer
aging degenerative disease all of this
would be solved if we had the ability to
tell cells what to build now why don't
we have this molecular biology and
biochemistry have been advancing
wonderfully over the over the decades uh
why do why why don't we have anything
remotely like this and I think that's
because we've been thinking about this
problem uh in the wrong way uh many
people when they see this they think
well this is some sort of a 3D printer
something to control gene expression
something to put the cells where they
need to go to to form whatever structure
you want but I want to propose the idea
that we should be thinking about this
differently this is not a 3D printer
this is not about micromanaging the
cells this is supposed to be a
Communications device it's supposed to
be a translator to convert your goals as
the bioengineer or the worker in
regenerative medicine it's supposed to
translate your goals into uh those of
the cellular Collective uh in order to
understand what I mean let's ask where
is it wa where does the body come from
in the first place so uh here is a
cross-section through the human torso
you can see incredibly complicated
organs everything is in the right place
and so on uh but we all start life like
this as a collection of embryonic
blastomers where does this pattern
actually come from and you might be
tempted to say that it's in the DNA of
course the the human genome but we we
know now we can read genomes and even
long before that we knew that genomes
don't really code for any of these
patterns what the genomes code for are
the proteins they directly encode the
hardware that every cell gets to have uh
once you have that Hardware you still
have to figure out how uh the
physiological software uh grows a
particular structure how does it know
when to stop what happens if cells
decide to do something different in the
case of cancer for example if something
is missing or damaged um how do we
induce them to repair and to rebuild it
again uh and as Engineers although I
won't talk about this today we have a
lot of work asking um what else can
these cells build can we get them to
build something completely different
that is not what their native outcome is
at all and I want to point out that in
order to solve this problem genetic
information is not enough there's a lot
of excitement about genomics and crisper
and things like that and I just want to
point point out the the the deep and
fundamental problem here this is uh this
is an a baby axel uh these these
salamanders at this juvenile stage they
have little four legs here this is a
taple of a frog uh they do not have legs
at this stage in my lab we make
something called a frog aot so it's a
hybrid It's a combination it has uh some
cells from the axotal some cells from
the Frog and we make a chimeric embryo
now I ask you a simple question will
frogot have legs or not we have the
genomes you have the axotal genome you
have the Frog genome could you tell me
if the frogot is going to have legs and
uh if it is going to have legs will
those legs be made entirely of Axel
cells or will they be made of some frog
cells we currently have no ability to
predict this from the genomes we know we
know the the entire sequence no one can
tell you a frogot are going to have legs
and that's because while molecular
medicine is very good at this low level
uh kind of description which proteins
interact with which other proteins and
so on uh we are really a long way away
from large scale Form and Function what
we want in biom medicine is when
somebody comes to you and they're
missing an arm or they uh had a birth
defect or a tumor or something else uh
and they want you to grow them a new one
or perhaps even change the one they have
into a different shape uh we are still
at the very beginning of knowledge with
this and I think that's because uh we
are in biology today we're computer
science was in the 1940s and 1950s this
is what programming used to look like
what she's doing here is she's
reprogramming this thing by physically
moving the wires in and out she's
rewiring the hardware and the reason
that on your laptop when you want to
switch from PowerPoint to Microsoft Word
you don't uh get out your soldering iron
and begin to rewire your laptop is
because computer science has learned
something very important that if your
Hardware is good enough and I'm going to
say that the biological Hardware is
absolutely good enough then uh instead
of uh trying to uh Force everything
bottom up at the level of the hardware
you can take advantage of
reprogrammability uh and other
competencies of the machine and I think
that we've only just begun to understand
the high level information processing
that exists in The Amazing uh agential
material of which we are all made and
this is what we need to focus on
reprogrammability
and the pro problem solving capacity of
our substrate now now when I say
intelligence and problem solving I mean
this uh William James uh gave this
definition of intelligence it's the
ability to reach the same goal by
different means so I'm not talking about
human level intelligence I'm not talking
about what it feels like to solve
problems or Consciousness or uh anything
like that I'm talking about a very uh
objective um third person kind of
Competency to navigate some kind of
problem space and reach your goal when
new things are happening and this
requires of course fundamentally this is
problem solving and it requires a lot of
plasticity it means that you can't just
do the same thing every time you can't
rely on your genome to uh instruct you
on exactly what to do you have to have
problem solving capacity so let's let's
talk about this um we as humans and as
uh as scientists are uh reasonably good
at detecting intelligence in
three-dimensional space so we see birds
or primates Maybe a whale or an octopus
or something and we see uh medium-sized
objects moving through three-dimensional
space at medium speeds and we can notice
intelligence but um I I want to stress
that in biology there are many other
spaces in which intelligences navigate
and make decisions and uh and and solve
problems and feel stress and so on uh
there is a transcriptional space so the
space of all possible gene expression uh
levels there is physiological State
space and this one we'll talk more about
today which is anatomical morphos space
or the space of possible anatomical
configurations in all of these spaces uh
they are very hard for us to visualize
we don't consider these kinds of actions
as Behavior but if you look carefully
and if you use the tools of
computational Neuroscience and behavior
science you can find phenomena that
bridge these two worlds all of the
things that we study in physiology and
molecular biology they are really uh
behavior of unconventional intelligences
I want to show you a couple of examples
of problems in here is a here is a
planarian this flatworm and we
discovered this a few years ago that uh
if you put these plenaria in a solution
of barium so barium is so barium
chloride blocks all the potassium
channels the first thing that happens is
their heads explode literally um
overnight their heads their heads
explode because these cells cannot uh
continue functioning with without the
ability of exchanging potassium with the
outside medium but then if you hold on
to these Tails something interesting
happens over a couple of weeks time the
these heads will regenerate a new head
and the new head in in barium you keep
them in barium the new head will uh will
form and the new head is completely
barium adapted so it has no problem
being being in this barium solution so
we asked the simple question uh how is
that possible we looked at the genes
expressed in these barium adapted heads
uh compared to the genes in the normal
head and we found that really there's
only there's only about a dozen or so
transcripts that are that are different
so now think about what's going on here
this is I I always visualize this as
being in a in a nuclear reactor control
room and the thing is melting down there
are all these buttons uh what do you do
you you this is a completely novel
stressor these planaria have never seen
barium before you have a physiological a
very strong physiological problem and
you need to figure out which of your
genes you're going to turn on or off to
solve this problem you can't do it
randomly because you there's no time to
to to look for uh to look for to to look
through all the astronomical
combinations of possible Gene
Expressions through like a thousand you
know 20,000 dimensional state space or
something like that uh and and of course
if you start randomly changing genes
you're most most likely to kill the
cells anyway how do you find in this
scenario what should you do for this
novel problem and we've seen this many
many times cells have remarkable ability
to find solutions to novel problems and
we as workers in medicine should be
looking for a translator interface to
ask them how they do it in other words
we should be able to ask the cell for a
given stressor what what kinds of home a
static adjustments would you would you
do because because actually they can do
many things that we have no idea how to
do but let's move Beyond this kind of
single cell survival and talk about
anatomy and where the body comes from
now we know that development is
incredibly reliable so these eggs
reliably will give rise to a normal
Target morphology and also we know that
there's a huge rise in complexity from
from this state to this state
anatomically you know complexity Rises
but the reason I'm calling this
intelligence is not because it becomes
more complex or uh because it is
reliable that's that's not sufficient
for intelligence what I'm talking about
is problem solving and specifically the
idea that if you take these early
mamalian embryos for example and you cut
them into pieces uh you don't get half
bodies what you get are perfectly normal
monozygotic Twins and triplets and
that's because this process can reach
the goal State the goal state in
anatomical space being something you
know like a normal human morphology from
different starting positions they will
in fact avoid local Minima um uh and uh
and get to where they're going through
novel paths uh and regulative
development is does an amazing job at
this um some animals can do this
throughout their lifespan so for example
here's a salamander this uh vertebrate
can regenerate its eyes its jaws its
limbs portions of the heart and the
Brain its spinal cord and its ovaries uh
just think of you know how how amazing
it would be for evolution for um
regenerative medicine if we understood
how this worked so what happens here is
that uh if you deviate so so here are
the cells have reached their target
morphology here's a perfect limb if you
amputate anywhere along this length the
cells will very quickly uh start to
build and they will build uh this this
structure and then they stop when
they're finished and that is the most
amazing thing about regeneration is that
it stops when it's done okay because if
you deviate it from the correct position
in anatomical space it can tell that
that's happened and it will work very
hard to get back to its goal so this is
a kind of homeostasis this is a kind of
anatomical homeostasis now this
regeneration is not just for the
so-called lower animals so the human
liver of course is is highly
regenerative um uh deer regenerate uh
huge amounts of bone and vasculature and
inovation every year they grow about a
centimeter and a half of bone per day
when they're doing this it's it's just
remarkable and uh human children have
also below a certain age have also been
known to regenerate their fingertips so
so we have some regenerative capacity
obviously not as good as a as a
salamander but but the most interesting
part of this is the ability to
accommodate novel scenarios so this is
this is something that that we we
discovered that if you take this um
tadpole uh which is supposed to become a
frog and in order to become a frog it
has to rearrange its face so the eyes
the Jaws the nostrils everything might
must move so all of this stuff has to
has to rearrange and you might think and
people did think that uh this was just a
hardwired set of processes every organ
moves in the right direction the right
amount and eventually you go from a
normal tle to a normal frog um so we
decided to test that in order to see the
intelligence of these materials you need
to challenge them with problems you need
to uh do perturbations functional
perturbations so what we did was we
created the so-called Picasso like Tates
so what's happening here is uh look the
eyes on the back of the head the mouth
is off to the side the whole thing is
scrambled okay it's everything is kind
of rearranged and what we found is that
they still make remarkably normal frogs
because all of these uh organs move
through novel paths in fact sometimes
they go tooo far and they must come back
they go through novel paths and until
they get to where they're going and then
they stop and we can track all of this
with CT scan so so it turns out that the
genetics does not specify a a hardwired
set of movements what it gives you is a
system that executes an error
minimization scheme it is able to detect
that it's in the wrong position it's
able to move in the correct direction
and then it stops when it's done so
again this idea of homeostasis but now
we have to ask some very basic questions
first well how does it know what the
correct position is what what does a how
does it know what a normal fraud face
looks like uh and number two how does it
do the computations that take it from
the abnormal position and get it closer
how does it navigate that anatomical
morphos space okay what what kind of
competencies does it have for navigation
and how does it work well we um we took
our inspiration from another system
where we know uh what sorts of
mechanisms lead from uh highlevel goals
in some kind of problem space to the to
the uh actuation of movement in that
space and so so the most familiar of
course is the nervous system so the
hardware in the nervous system looks
like this you have neurons that have ion
channels in their membrane these ion
channels produce a voltage gradient
which may or may not be propagated
through electrical synapse to their
neighbors and the movement of this
electrical information through the
network is what underlies the thing that
I talked about at the beginning of the
of the talk which is the ability to
pursue goals in a problem space right to
process information to remember what
your goal is and then to act in order to
get closer to that goal so it is the uh
commitment of Neuroscience that that
electrophysiology is what underlies the
software of the mind this is uh this is
a real-time zebra fish brain you can see
all the signaling in the zebra fish
brain and the idea is that if we knew
how to decode this we would be able to
uh uh read out the memories the
preferences the goals the um behavioral
repertoire of this animal that all of
its cognitive uh features are encoded in
the electrophysiology of these cells
okay so so this is our inspiration for
asking how does a group of cells know
what the goal is and how does it try to
get there well it turns out that this
idea uh the the use of
electrophysiological networks to process
information to link uh and and and um
align information across distance and
across time from the past to to the
Future was discovered by Evolution very
early it did not wait for neurons and
muscles and brains to evolve it actually
evolved around the time of bacterial
biofilms so every cell in your body has
these ion channels all all the cells in
your body are electrically active not
not like the nerves they don't Spike
necessarily but they're all electrically
active and uh many of them have these
electrical Gap Junctions and they form
networks so what do these networks think
about if this network thinks about
moving you through three-dimensional
space this network thinks about how to
maintain how to build and maintain the
complex anatomy of your body uh the the
the cellular Collective uses
bioelectricity to navigate anatomical
space first to build it during embryonic
development and then to defend it
against cancer and against aging
throughout the lifespan and so we've
started the same uh the same kind of
project uh like neural decoding but not
the neurons to see if we can interpret
these and so this this is this is all
the electrical conversations that an
early frog embryo is conducting so you
can see the the colors correspond to
different voltage levels and you can see
all the cells uh having these these
little um interactions with each other
to determine who's going to be head tail
Left Right could we learn to decode this
could we could we understand what are
the what are the memories what are the
plans that this uh morphogenetic
collective intelligence has so we
developed uh the first tools to read and
write the electrical information of the
non-neural tissues first we use voltage
sensitive fluorescent dieses and so so
here you can see what that looks like so
there are some in this in this group of
cells there are some of course some
rapid changes but there are also some
quite slow uh slow changes uh there's
all kinds of pattern these cells are
doing lots of things uh we do a lot of
computer simulation to tie the
electrophysiology to the gene expression
and to understand its properties for
example how does it how does it change
over time how does it spread over
distance all that kind of thing I want
to show you uh two two two interesting
patterns this is a time lapse of the
Frog embryo putting its face together so
uh you can see and this is this is a
grayscale color map of the of the
voltage and you can see there's a lot
going on but this is one frame from that
video and this one frame we call this
the electric face and this was this was
first found by Danny Adams in my group
um what happens is that long before the
genes come on and the the cells are
starting to uh to uh build a face these
bioelectric patterns are already
regionalizing the tissue and and they
are telling the cells where all the or
are going to be this is where the
animal's right eye is going to be here's
the mouth here are the placodes and if
you manipulate this electrical data
structure you will see that the gene
expression changes and the anatomy
changes and I'll show you that in a
minute so this is a critical natural uh
component of normal embryogenesis the
this we are reading now the
bioelectrical uh pre pattern the memory
that these cells are going to use in
order to plan and then build the face
here's a pathological structure we'll
talk about that in a minute this is a a
human bogin have been injected into the
stpo they're going to make a tumor the
tumor is going to metastasize here but
uh long before that happens you can use
these voltage dieses to read the
electric state of these cells and see
that there's a region here which is
quite aberant it's quite abnormal it's a
highly depolarized it's very different
than the rest and here's where the tumor
is going to be and then here are some
straggler cells that you should watch
out for so we built these tools to read
the electrical information but um much
more important than that is to be able
to uh modify and to do functional
experiments and write the information
and so so here's how we do it we do not
use any electrodes there are no Fields
there are no waves there are no
frequencies no electromagnetics we do uh
basically we do exactly what
Neuroscience does to control the
interface that these cells are using to
control each other that means we can
change the open close state of the Gap
Junctions so we can open or shut them
and control which cells talk to which
other cells and we can directly control
these different ion channels so this
means with ph ology this means with
mutant channels it means optogenetics um
all the tools of of Neuroscience we can
we can deploy here now here comes the
critical question okay so so what can
you do with this when you change these
voltage uh these voltage patterns what
what actually happens how do we know
that the cells care about this at all
well um one thing that you can do is you
can call up new organs this way and I'll
show you one in particular but you can
make ectopic inner ear structures so
here are some oyss you can make ectopic
Hearts here you can make extra forbrain
here's where the normal forbrain stops
so you can make this extra large
forbrain we can call up extra limbs so
here's our our six-legged frog here um
and so on and one particular example I
want to show you in in a little bit of
detail is the induction of ectopic eyes
so uh this is uh uh the the
developmental biology textbook will tell
you that only the cells here in the
anterior Nector are capable of forming
eyes and that's because they use this
so-called master I Gene called pack six
to try to induce eyes and that's true if
you use pack six it only forms up here
but it turns out that if you use
pottassium channels so I ION channel
mRNA for specific pottassium channels
and you inject them into regions of the
embryo where they will set up that
little spot that little voltage pattern
that I showed you in the electric face
uh if you set up that pattern somewhere
else then what it does is convince his
cells to build an eye so here's an eye
on the made out of cells that were going
to be gut here and uh if you if you
section that eye you have lens right and
optic nerve all the same kinds of things
that that should be in an eye uh but uh
notice notice a couple of interesting
things first of all uh the bioelectric
pattern is clearly instructive by re by
uh uh rearranging that pattern somewhere
else you you can call up whole entire
organ so it's clearly functionally
determinative of what happens it's not
an epip phenomenon uh the second thing
is that it it is incredibly modular
meaning that we didn't have to tell
these cells how to build an eye we
didn't say anything about about stem
cells about gene expression about the
geometry of all the different tissues
inside the eye we didn't say any of that
all we provided was a very highlevel sub
routine call that says build an ie here
and this is really great for
regenerative medicine because that means
we can call up complex Downstream uh
outcomes without having to or knowing
how to micromanage the the details and
then finally just to point out another
interesting competency of of the
material look this is a cross-section
through an eye in the flank of a of an
embryo somewhere the blue cells are the
ones that we actually targeted with our
ION channel RNA but what they did was
they realized there's not enough of them
to make a good eye so they recruited all
these other natural cells to work with
them to make this eye much like ants and
termites a different kind of collective
intelligence recruits their friends from
the from the colony to help them move
heavy objects uh we didn't have to teach
the cells to do that they already do it
as soon as these cells learn that they
must make an eye they take on the next
step of instructing all these other
cells that you have to help and here's
how we make an eye all of these are
things that we have to take advantage of
and this is not available from the
bottom up level of of of of genes or or
proteins or anything like that this is
this this we we have to understand the
decision-making and the collective
competencies of our material and I want
to show you another story about limb
regeneration so normally in frogs if you
amputate the limb unlike salamanders
frogs do not regenerate uh their legs at
this at this adult stage uh what you do
see actually is something quite
interesting we call it um injury
mirroring uh the cut leg will will show
you a bioelectric signal here at the
wound but so will the uncut leg within
30 seconds uh the information passes to
the leg that was never touched and that
leg lights up at exactly the same
location where the wound happened on the
opposite side it is not neurally
mediated you can remove the spinal cord
it still works fine uh that information
is spread across and we know bi
electrical networks are really good at
spreading information so now uh those of
you interested in in medicine now start
to think what kind of information about
disease and injury is available at a
distance on the opposite side of of the
of the body that we could read and uh
and have some kind of surrogate site
Diagnostics um where you don't have to
actually measure the the tissue you're
talking about what other tissues are
picking up damage information like that
but going beyond that we decided to to
uh to test if we could tell these cells
to go to the Regeneration area not in
the in the morphos space not the
scarring area and so we developed a a
cocktail of for that uh basically
triggers regeneration and and
immediately you start to get toes you
get a toenail eventually you get a quite
nice leg that keeps growing the leg is
touch sensitive it is motile um you know
well patterned fairly respectable again
the the thing is that we don't say how
to build an a leg we don't know how to
build a leg all we tell the cells is we
communicate the goal we say build build
a leg and and then we don't touch it um
a a on- day intervention with our
cocktail results in a year and a half of
leg growth during which time we don't
touch it at all once youve once you've
communicated to the cells they do they
do the rest and at this point um I have
to do a disclosure because there's a
company here called morphos cutical
which was started by David Kaplan uh and
myself and we are now moving that that
technology through the use of wearable
bioreactors into mammals and eventually
we hope into human patients to be able
to use uh these stimuli these these uh
triggers of complex organ regeneration
and we're aiming with more ticals were
aiming for limb regeneration hopefully
eventually in patients um okay the next
story I want to tell you about is birth
defects so once again uh this this bi
these bi electrical patterns are
critical for the organs to know what
shape they should be so here's the brain
of a tatp so here's the forebrain the
midbrain the hindbrain uh and if these
embryos are exposed to a teratogen for
example nicotine or alcohol or many
other things you can see there's a
defect right so so the forebrain is
greatly damaged the eyes are connected
to the brain there's not the right shape
I mean every everything is is is
problematic here and we decided to ask
what could we do about this could we
could we fix this somehow and we made a
computational model that uh linked the
changes in the bioelectrics with the
final outcome and that model uh was was
was good enough that we could ask it a
simple question if the brain is is
incorrectly uh shaped uh what kind of
ION channel could we open or close in
order to repair that and so um here is
uh here's again normal brain this is a
brain of a of an embryo with a mutation
and a gene called Notch Notch is a very
important neurogenesis Gene with this
dominant Notch mutation look the
forebrain is uh is basically gone the
midbrain and hindbrain are just bubbles
these animals have no Behavior they're
they're profoundly affected this is a a
radical B birth defect now what we did
was we asked this model how could we fix
this the model pointed us to one
specific ION channel called hcn2 and it
suggested that we if we turn on hcn2 the
uh sharpness of the pattern that is
ruined here and I'm I'm skipping a lot
of information for a lack of time that I
could show you what these patterns look
like that basically What's Happening
Here is that the pattern has become
blurry or fuzzy it's just not sharp
enough and the edges the brain doesn't
know where the edges are and so we used
the opening of hcn2 to sharpen that
pattern and when we do that and you
could do that with drugs that open in
Native hcn2 or you can introduce novel
hcn2 RNA in either case you're back to a
normal shaped brain a normal gene
expression in the brain and in fact
their IQs come back to normal we tested
their learning rates and they're
indistinguishable from controls now so
so these animals here they have a a
genetic uh Notch mutation a dominant
Notch mutation but you couldn't tell
that from their behavior or from the
anatomy or from the gene expression
they're all fixed and so at least in
some cases and I'm not saying this will
be true in all cases but at least in
some cases certain Hardware defects can
be fixed in software by communicating
the correct pattern to the cells
regardless of what's underneath than
what would have happened normally with
the hardware so this is this is our road
map for um for birth defect repair and
so what we're doing now is creating this
the system we call it Eden the
electrocutica design environment where
uh you know what the electric state is
that's incorrect that you're trying to
fix uh if we do enough uh physics to get
the data so that you know what the
correct pattern is then you can ask the
computational system which ION channel
targets are the ones that are going to
get you from the wrong state to the
corre correct State and so you can
already play with this this is online um
at this um at this link uh anybody can
look at different tissues uh both normal
and and transformed and it will tell you
which are the ion channels that are your
potential targets and that makes it easy
for you to pick electral now we can pick
drugs something like 20% of all drugs
are ION channel drugs and so there's
this enormous toolkit um that allows us
to uh uh to to to do these kinds of
things if you know one once the
computational model tells you what to do
so the final thing I want to show you
has to do with cancer so our cells are
extremely good at solving little tiny
problems they have very small goals
their goals are around metabolic State
about the pH level you know these little
little tiny goals really at the level of
a single cell but look at look at this
homeostatic system this this uh huge
Collective has enormous grandiose goals
of building a limb and when they're
deviated from that they work really hard
to get back there so Evolution and
development has allowed the scaling of
the go s to uh to rise uh during during
the lifetime and of course there's a
failure mode unfortunately to this
process and that's cancer so this is
human gly blastoma What's Happening Here
is that these cells are disconnecting
from the electrical Network when they
disconnect they can no longer remember
this giant think they're working on
they're back to their ancient
unicellular tiny little cognitive light
cone and uh and and then these cells you
know these cells are not more selfish
than normal cells they just have smaller
selves so the idea is that cancer is a
kind of a dissociative identity disorder
of the cellular collective intelligence
these cells are are only working on
little tiny single cell goals now and so
this means two things it means first of
all that we can watch for this
electrical change uh and we can Envision
so this this has not been created yet
this is kind of an artist rendition of
what we're working on but the idea is to
have a kind of augmented reality goggles
along with a voltage sensitive die so
that surgeons or even people at home
actually uh with these dieses can can
look and uh and see pre-cancer they can
see cells that are about to disconnect
from the network and they can see the
margins of the tumor and uh you know
this is this is where the aberant
electrical states are so we're hoping to
create something like that but even more
importantly than just diagn detecting it
you can imagine what if we forcibly
reconnected these cells to their
neighbors not kill them with to toxic
chemotherapy but just reconnect them and
so here is an animal injected with a
with a nasty enene we've done Kass
mutations dominant negative p-53 all
those kinds of things uh what you'll see
is that the uh the enco protein is still
blazingly expressed here it's very
strong but there is no tumor because
this is the same animal here because we
co-injected an ion channel that forces
it doesn't kill the cells it doesn't
remove the ENA protein but what it does
do is force the cells into an electrical
Network that will work towards large
scale goals building nice skin nice
muscle and so on and we think this is uh
this is also this normalization this
tumor reprogramming or normalization
approach uh not at the genetic level
this you know here's another example
where the the the the physiological
state drives the outcome not the genetic
state but the physiological information
drives drives the outcome and so we've
now uh started moving from from the Frog
model into the human model so this is
some recent work Wanita Matthews recent
work in human gleo blastoma and looking
for ION channel uh drug combinations
that actually normalize these cells and
uh and and and make them stop
proliferating and be more neural likee
and the very last thing I want to show
you is this uh take a look at take a
look at this little this little creature
if I asked you what this was you might
guess that um it's some kind of simple
life form that we found on the bottom of
a lake somewhere and uh also uh you know
if you thought about its its
competencies you might think that you
know the conventional kinds of things
that the simple simple aquatic animals
uh make but but it's really important to
understand the uh for for for definitive
regenerative medicine it's important to
understand our material and what I will
tell you is that if you were to sequence
this genetic Ally sequence what you
would see is 100% Homo sapiens these are
adult human cells um in fact we we call
them anthr robots because these are
biobots made from uh adult patient
donated uh tracheal epithelium the cells
in a special environment self assemble
into this kind of multile little thing
that you just saw this is what they look
like when we stain them they have little
hairs on their surface that they use
here here are these little cilia that
they use to swim around uh and they have
some really interesting competencies I
can only show you one today here's one
these are human neurons plated in a dish
here and here we've made a a scratch
wound so so it's a it's a it's a defect
it's a scratch and and they they
navigate these these these wounds they
sort of Traverse them and then what
happens is they can settle there and
they form these superbot clusters so
this is uh probably around 10 10 of
these anthr robots they form this
cluster but what they're doing here if
you look carefully is they're knitting
together the two sides of the neural
wound in other words when you lift them
up four days later you find that that
underneath this is what they were doing
they were healing the the Gap here
between this this injury this is this is
IP these are IPS neurons like peripheral
inovation so who would have thought that
your tracheal cells which sit quietly
for decades in your Airway uh have the
ability to form a motile little creature
that looks nothing like a standard human
or any human developmental sequence they
have thousand they express thousands of
genes differently than the native human
tissue almost like a different life form
and and yet uh they have this amazing
capacity to heal your body and so this
is the beginning of what we call
agential interventions you know drugs
are very simple they're mechanical they
just do what they do but is it wouldn't
it be amazing to uh deploy uh biobots
made of your own cells so you don't need
uh immunos supression uh they're your
they're made of the patient's own cells
they go into your body they do um
healing properties like this natively or
maybe we've taught them to do other
things um and then eventually they they
biodegrade but they are your own cells
and already know uh what health disease
stress inflammation cancer these are all
things that cells already understand we
don't need to manufacture this from
scratch such as mechanical Nanobots and
things like that so I'll stop here and
and just summarize on what I've tried to
say is that I think I think the rate
limiting step in truly transformative
regenerative medicine is uh our ability
to communicate goals to Cellular swarms
to view them not as complex uh complex
um machines but actually uh uh a agents
problem solving agents with goals and uh
preferences and uh and agendas that we
need to communicate and collaborate with
um genetics and Big Data are not
sufficient for this um crisper and
things like that you know the biggest
problem is going to be what genes do you
crisper you know what genes do you edit
uh it's it's this kind of bottomup
approach for complex problems is not
going to be sufficient um uh fortunately
we have a road map for this and it comes
from behavior science and Neuroscience
and we can exploit the native uh
computation competencies of the software
of life top- down control resetting
their goals resetting their set points
not trying to micromanage them
molecularly and specifically the
bioelectric interface I mean there's a
lot of different kinds of intelligence
in cell groups but bioelectricity is a a
a very nice interface to that
intelligence much like it is in the
nervous system and we now have the
beginning of tools both computational
tools and practical bench stop tools to
begin to um use that to uh uh make
applications in birth defects
regeneration cancer and synthetic
engineering and so the way I see uh
biomedicine um developing in the future
is that you have all these B bottom up
interventions and this is where all the
attention has been focused and there's
some some incredible uh advances here uh
but actually there is now this whole new
frontier of top down interventions I
haven't even talked about um our work in
training cells and and tissu so Behavior
shaping them uh here's the agential
implants that I talked about the
electral all of this and all of this is
discussed in in in in great detail here
in these papers but the idea is that
that um uh bioelectrical system that
pervades our bodies is an interface to
the intelligence that exists at
different levels and now you with
especially with AI tools we have the
ability to not only communicate as we do
now with drugs and surgery and so on at
the very lowest level but we can now
communicate with some of these higher
levels and take advantage of the idea of
complex gold driven
outcomes propagated down through the
intelligence of the tissue not simply
micromanaged and okay I'll end here and
I just want to thank the people who did
all the work so these are the postdocs
and The Graduate students um who did who
did all the work that I showed you today
uh we have lots of lots of amazing um
collaborators um and here are the
funders that have supported some of this
work and again dis for disclosures um
three companies that have supported this
work so um thank you very much for
listening